<h3><b>Introduction</b></h3>

<h4>The figure to the right shows the median concentration in 1,174 Underground Storage Tank Sites in California over time. Because of stricter environmental regulations, the number and magnitude of releases has greatly diminished over time. In addition, almost all of these sites have had some form of source remediation, and all have benefitted from natural attenuation processes. Therefore, between 2004 and 2017, the median benzene concentration in groundwater at the highest concentration well in each of the 1,174 sites has been reduced by about 90%, from about 4,000 μg/L to about 500 μg/L (McHugh et al., 2013, 2019).<br><br>

The table below shows the median change in benzene concentrations and in LNAPL apparent thickness from several hundred Underground Storage Tank Sites in California. Sites where companies were actively recovering LNAPL showed a benzene half-life (the time required for source zone monitoring well concentrations to decrease by 50%) of about 8 years, while sites with LNAPL in monitoring wells but no active remediation exhibited a benzene half-life of about 4 years. During the monitoring period, the thickness of the LNAPL in monitoring wells decreased by about 90% both for sites where active LNAPL recovery was on-going and sites where there was no active LNAPL recovery (Kulkarni et al., 2015).<br><br>

Another resource is a simple nomograph method for screening estimates of LNAPL source mass depletion times, provided by Golder (2016).  The nomographs can be used for estimating hydrocarbon mass depletion times resulting from biodegradation (mass loss rate) in the vadose zone and dissolution (mass loss rate) from the saturated zone.</h4>
