<h3><b>Introduction</b></h3>

<h4>The potential risk associated with LNAPL composition can change over time as the LNAPL is weathered due to Natural Source Zone Depletion (NSZD), often decreasing over time. This reduction in risk over time increases the reliability of NSZD as a long-term LNAPL management strategy. The table below shows an approximate way to conceptualize the change in risk as LNAPLs weather. At most LNAPL sites, most of the risk in groundwater exposure pathways are associated with the amount of benzene that is present in the LNAPL. The higher the mole fraction of benzene in the LNAPL, the higher the potential concentration of dissolved benzene in groundwater. In this example, the composition of a fresh gasoline and a weathered gasoline were taken from a 1990 paper by Johnson et al. As can be seen in the table, the fresh gasoline had a benzene mole fraction of 0.0093 (calculated from a mass fraction of 0.0076 or about 1% by weight) (column 2). These calculations assumed a temperature of 20°C and 1 atmosphere pressure. The weathering process removes benzene, and the weathered gasoline mole fraction was 0.0028 (mass fraction of 0.0021) (column 3). When the mole fractions are multiplied by a pure-phase effective solubility (column 4), a theoretical concentration in groundwater can be calculated for water in perfect equilibrium with the LNAPL (columns 5 and 6). Then, using common regulatory criteria in the U.S. for allowable concentrations in drinking water (column 7), a relative risk (RR) factor was calculated for both the fresh and weathered gasoline (columns 8 and 9) where the equilibrium water concentration is divided by the regulatory criteria. As shown in columns 8 and 9, benzene by far has the highest regulatory risk. 
<br><br>
The bottom right of the table shows the cumulative relative risk for the BTEX compounds and naphthalene was 3,285 for the fresh gasoline but only 1,020 for the weathered gasoline. Therefore, in this simple example, the relative risk associated with the LNAPL was reduced by almost 70% when going from a fresh gasoline to the weathered gasoline sample. This is only an example of how the hypothetical risk of LNAPL can change over time due to LNAPL attenuation processes over time. Although each site will be different, in general LNAPL attenuation processes will reduce the risk associated with groundwater exposure pathways over time. </h4>

<hr class="featurette-divider">

<h4>Johnson, P.C., M.W. Kemblowski, and J.D. Colthart. 1990. Quantitative Analysis of Cleanup of Hydrocarbon-Contaminated Soils by In-Situ Soil Venting. Ground Water, Vol. 28, No. 3. May – June 1990, pp 413-429.
<br><br>
Newell, C.J.. and T. McHugh, 2021.  LNAPL Risk Change Over Time Example,  Concawe LNAPL Toolbox.</h4>
